---
layout: entry
title: "BRUCH"
role: Artist Manager
period: December 2018 - April 2019
description: BRUCH is an electronic music producer based in ACM Guildford.
active: false
feature: false
permalink: /mgmt/
---
# Artist Bio
<hr>

**You can find BRUCH on [Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/bruchmusic/) and [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/artist/35ht3cw9emBnkLoQXpKEvj?si=N9_bZszvTs-8WSaWYpcxIg)**

Described by her followers as having elements of Björk, Kate Bush, Suzanne Vega, and Goldfrapp, all wrapped into a tiny, artistic explosion, BRUCH is a purveyor of curious, electronic sounds, multi-layered vocals and ethereal melodies, bringing her classical cello training into the mix for an eclectic juxtaposition. BRUCH is completely self-produced, and 98% of the sounds you hear in her music are created entirely by her.

BRUCH’s music is like nothing else.

She takes influence from artists such as Massive Attack, Alice Phoebe Lou and David Bowie, along with a wide array of classical composers. A proud ‘owner’ of her Asperger’s Syndrome, BRUCH has been creating music since the age of thirteen. Her music is unique and diverse, spanning the genres of folk, pop and electronica, with a Nordic twist thrown in for good measure. But in quiet moments, she can be found listening to anything from Satie to Sondheim.

Her last three singles, Empty Land, Welcome, and CROWN. were snapped up by BBC Introducing for their Saturday night show, to great acclaim from both the host, Stephanie Nieuwenhuys, and the show’s audience, and she performed a two-song Live Lounge and interview for them in August. You can watch on iPlayer [here](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p06l8qqm).

One of the live tracks, Tortoise Skin, was from her recently released EP, Autis, which takes listeners on a multi-faceted journey through her autistic creativity. During the five-song EP, the audience journeys from ambient, hypnotic moments into bass-driven, thunderous tribal drumming, all accentuated by her multi-layered cello sections.

2019 will see BRUCH appearing on the BBC Introducing Stage at Winchestival, plus sets at Hastings Fat Tuesday and the Metropolis Blue Label showcase launch night, with many more to be announced…