---
layout: post
title:  "Dissertation Thesis: What Is the Impact of the 2003 Licensing Act on Nightclubs in the United Kingdom?"
byline: test
author: Olly Wiggins
heading-img: black-generic-bg.png
icon_id: fas fa-book
published: false
---

# ABSTRACT

The night has a history of fraught relations and cultural belonging in Britain. What was once viewed as immoral has now bloomed in to a fully fledged economy — the night time economy (NTE). Yet, the research discovers that the NTE is not a regular economy. In fact, it is an economy that is shaped by cultures, licensing and governance. The research investigates a pivotal piece of legislation that governs the NTE, the Licensing Act 2003 (LA2003), and discusses the impacts it has on nightclubs in the United Kingdom. By taking a case study approach, as well as employing the use of archival analysis, the research illustrates the impacts the LA2003 has had on Fabric — a London-based nightclub — which has felt the brunt of the act in the last ten years. The research discovers that the way the LA2003 is being policed is having implications for compliant night club venues, rather than the act itself. In providing a framework for future analysis, the researcher suggests further examination is needed to understand the implications on different types of nightclubs in other locations. Moreover, a holistic study should be conducted to understand how club-goers are affected by the LA2003.

# Introduction

> “Dance floors can unify people in ways that governments and religions can’t and I stand by that sh*t 100%”

The night - a time for entertainment, consumption, and pleasure seeking - has historically been fraught with tension amongst governmental bodies and religious leaders in British culture. Yet, for certain groups, the night time presents opportunities for expression, hedonism, and escape from the social norms experienced during the day. Prominently, the night clubs and dance floors that dominated, and continued to dominate, post-industrial cities and urban space in twentieth and twenty-first century Britain facilitated a ‘safe space’ for oppressed communities; a means of leisure for the denizens of the night; the creation of employment; and cultural belonging. Thus, the importance of night time activities cannot be understated — as aptly summarised by the quote that began this introduction. Despite this, there continues to be antagonistic, shifting relations between night-dwellers, the government, and the regulators.

In centuries past, the darkness associated with the night was seen as immoral and ‘synonymous with evil’, a view that was held ‘amongst the sheriffs and city fathers throughout England’ (Burke, 1943). While developments in street lighting in the seventeenth century — which brought light to the dimly lit cities of the night — alleviated concerns surrounding the night-time, ‘enabling the expansion of daytime activities into the night’ (Roberts & Eldridge, 2009), night spaces themselves continued to be seen as a ‘social problem’ and a place for ‘deviant behaviour’ (Talbot, 2007).

While the cultures and attitudes surrounding the night in pre-industrial and industrial Britain provide a useful context, they are not the main focus of this research. Indeed, historic licensing law pertaining to alcohol and entertainment in Britain has been extensively covered by numerous academics and its impact on society widely discussed. Instead, this research will discuss a pivotal piece of modern-era legislation named the Licensing Act 2003 (LA2003).

The LA2003 discussed in academia and research is still particularly concerned with pubs and bars. On the other hand, nightclubs are notably lacking in the discourse, despite these particular venues feeling the full effects of licensing law. Inspired by the extensive discourse on rave culture and the regulatory practises of the night, this research aims to investigate the impacts of current licensing legislation and governance on UK-based nightclubs.

In order to achieve the outcomes of the study, a mixed methodological approach was taken involving the investigation of archival documents; a review of current and historical literature; and a semi-structured interview. Moreover, during a preliminary research phase, three key themes were drawn out in order to provide appropriate context and analysis to the research: the night time economy, licensing practises of the night, and policing practises of the night. In doing so, this study uncovers a complexity to the night time economy which is shaped by visible forces, such as the various businesses that operate in a designated zone, and invisible forces — licensing and policing.

By demonstrating an awareness of the historical and cultural practises involved within the night time space, the research begins to examine the implications of the LA2003 in regard to Fabric — a London-based nightclub — which has notably felt the brunt of licensing law in the last ten years. This particular nightclub was chosen in order to highlight the stakeholders within the establishment that shape and mould contemporary British nightlife. In doing so, this researcher proposes an alternative form of analysis in order to establish a new topic of debate in current academic discourse.

# “Night Time Economy” or “Urban Nightscapes”? 

> “There’s a certain quality, vibe, and energy that is SoDoSoPa. From the independent merchants and unique cafes to the rustic charm of a mixed-income crowd. Where else can you let loose your wild side while still being a part of helping the local economy?”

The night time economy (NTE) and, more importantly, what constitutes a NTE, is a contested area within urban discourse, but perhaps what fittingly conceptualises this particular type of economy in pop culture is the story of SoDoSoPa in Season 19, Episode 3 of South Park. The story parodies the concept of gentrification in which a derelict neighbourhood within the town of South Park gets transformed into a vibrant leisure district, named SoDoSoPa, consisting of ‘unique cafes’, bars and play-scapes. Much like the towns and cities of today, SoDoSoPa represents the interconnectivity of ‘work, living and leisure’ (Garcia, 2018; Chatterton & Hollands, 2003) described in literature; providing a digestible visual representation of the themes discussed in this chapter.

The conception of the NTE is well established within literature, with the consensus amongst researchers pointing towards a mix of industrialisation (Chatterton & Hollands, 2003), the decline of the ‘traditional employment base’ (Hobbs et al. 2005) and post-Fordism (Chatterton & Hollands, 2003) as being key drivers of the night time economy — the latter of which, argued by Kolioulis (2018) and Chatterton & Hollands (2003), being central to urban economic growth and ‘blurring the lines between work and play’ (Kolioulis 2018). However, while these studies are helpful in establishing the post-1980s British NTE, research is lacking a deeper holistic analysis of the NTE, which is crucial in understanding how these spaces are used in the wider cultural context. 

While not relevant to the chosen locality in this study, Bianchini (1995) notes a historic use of the term NTE used to describe a programme of cultural events centred around activities of film, sports and dance, television and theatre. These activities ran throughout the night, often in redundant and derelict warehouses; the locality of such events mirroring those in Britain (Roberts & Eldridge, 2009).

By going back further in to history, the advent of street lighting — as briefly discussed in the introduction — ‘facilitated the growth of late night leisure’ (Roberts & Eldridge, 2009), in essence, supporting the creation of a night time space and a ‘clicking into gear of a new economy’ (Lovatt & O’Connor, 1995). Metropolitan areas in the United Kingdom between the twentieth and twenty-first century were underpinned by numerous cultural and developmental changes; most notably culminating in the facilitation of oft-entrepreneurial night clubs within city spaces. In a key analysis of city centres, Chatterton & Hollands (2003) noted the changing landscapes of city centres into places for living, working, and entertainment, as a result of deindustrialisation the neoliberal politics pioneered by the Thatcher government. Coupled with the accessibility of ‘redundant warehouses’ (Roberts & Eldridge, 2009) in the area, and the shift from unlicensed outdoor events to indoor licensed events (Measham & Moore, 2009) as a result of the British acid house scene, nightclubs — along with pubs and bars — became the predominant forms of late night activity (Roberts & Eldridge, 2009).

Yet, there is a lack of awareness for the wider powers at play within the discourse of the NTE. Hobbs & Hall (2000), for example, argue that the ‘main aim for clubs is to ply people with alcohol’, and early critiques of the NTE (Hobbs et al., 2005; Hadfield et al., 2009) have continued to ‘associate late night culture with alcohol and drinking’ (Roberts & Eldridge, 2009) or ‘violence and disorder’ (Talbot, 2007). It is true that alcohol plays a key part in the NTE, as explained by the growing popularity of ‘themed pubs’ (Hadfield et al., 2009), but as Garcia (2018) argues, nightlife is ‘situated amongst a larger atmosphere of nocturnal landscapes’ — a web of interconnecting entities — consisting of ‘taxi drivers and late-night takeaways’ (Garcia, 2018).

Within some studies, discourse has focused on clubbing culture and its role in providing a space for ‘freedom of expression’ (Garcia, 2018) or ‘belonging’ (Moore, 2004). Moore (2004), in particular, in a study of clubbing culture, echoed the positive effects of music and dancing within certain communities. Clubbers found an allure to the wide variety of socioeconomic backgrounds and ability to encounter those ‘unlike yourself’; an ‘alternate reality’ in which the divisive discourse of the British establishment and Western society is a work of fiction (Moore, 2004). It is necessary to highlight the importance of these ‘neo-tribes’ (Measham & Moore, 2009; Hollands, 2002; Shildrick & MacDonald, 2006) because the cultures at play are driven, influenced, or even suppressed, by the nature of licensing law and, or, policing. Researchers should broaden their thinking from the alcohol-centric normalities of the night and explore how the powers and forces at play influence or threaten a culture that communities see as impeccable to their way of life.

Yet, the growing complexity of the night time space has brought into question the sustainability of the term “NTE”. Night clubs, along with the pubs and bars, are situated in a realm of office and residential developments (Lovatt & O’Connor, 1995); amongst the mainstream and alternative cultures (Measham & Moore, 2009); and the operational, and sometimes invisible, structures that support the NTE like night time public transport and CCTV systems (Hobbs et al., 2005). Consequently, Chatterton & Hollands (2003) set out to provide a ‘robust classification’ of the NTE in what they dubbed ‘urban nightscapes’, a term used to analyse the ‘production, consumption and regulation practises’ associated with nightlife spaces. This refined approach enables researchers to explore the NTE while recognising cultures, ‘corporatisation’ and ‘sanitisation’ (Measham & Moore, 2009), amongst other themes. This is further backed up by Talbot (2004), who reinforces the issues of existing research as it treats the NTE ‘as a business like any other’. For the sake of consistency, however, this particular piece of research will continue to use the term NTE.

# Licensing the Night

As briefly touched upon in the introduction, there has been a long history in licensing the activities of the night, to an extent where the license itself has become ‘so well embedded in regulatory thinking’ (Talbot, 2011) in the UK. This thinking stretches back to the eighteenth century at the advent of alcohol and entertainment licensing, by means of exercising control over its provision (Talbot, 2011). The passing of the LA2003, however, deregulated and ‘modernised’ alcohol and entertainment licensing — highlighted by the lax restrictions on opening times, amongst other forms of deregulation (Light, 2005). Yet, in this new era of liberalisation, control of alcohol continues to be at the ‘heart of urban governance’ (Hadfield et al., 2009) and entertainment remains to be partly regulated, particularly at night. In order to continue with the review of current legislation, it is important to discuss changes in governmental thinking that first brought alcohol — and more importantly music and dancing — under the remit of licensing law. After all, as Talbot (2007) argues, it is ‘not possible to consider the impact of licensing law without a consideration of its origins’.

The first innovations in entertainment licensing came with the passing of the Disorderly Houses Act 1752. The act was passed in response to a petition by Henry Fielding who, amongst a plethora of other concerns, was troubled about the growth and causes in criminal activity amongst the ‘lowest orders’ (Talbot, 2007). Particularly, for Fielding, the pursuit of pleasures by the lower orders ‘shook the foundations of wealth’ as it singled a ‘loss of money and time’ and ‘an increase in drunkenness’ (Talbot, 2007). While a portion of the act was concerned with ‘preventing Theft and Robberies’ (Disorderly Houses Act 1751 s.13), it proposed that no area within a 20 mile radius of London was to be kept for the purposes of public entertainment — in this case, ‘music and dancing’ (House of Lords, 1912) — without a license. While the act has since been repealed, entertainment licensing continued to mutate ‘beyond their original form’ (Talbot, 2007) in subsequent legislation: the Home Counties (Music and Dancing) Licensing Act 1926; the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982; and the Licensing Act 1964.

The LA2003 was the last major innovation in licensing law and, as of writing, is currently in force in the United Kingdom. Inspired by a governmental White Paper (Home Office, 2000) and led by the incumbent Labour Party, the act both ‘simplified’ (Light, 2005) and ‘liberalised’ (Talbot, 2011) licensing procedures. While the British establishment has long had a history of alcohol regulation, the consensus in this post-millennium era swung in favour of liberalising alcohol licensing, insofar that it was losing its moral dimension (Light, 2005). Amongst other innovations, the act sought to categorise preventative measures with ‘licensing objectives’, which involved the prevention of crime and disorder; public safety; the prevention of public nuisance; and the protection of children from harm (Licensing Act 2003 s.4(2)). To aid the governance of these objectives, local authorities now acted as the sole licensing authorities. (Light, 2005)

Importantly, prior to the 2003 Act, alcohol and entertainment were separately regulated by two different authorities. With the passing of the new act, both of these activities were brought into the remit of a single licensable authority (Hadfield et al., 2009); in essence, equating alcohol and entertainment — music and dancing — as a single issue that needed to be addressed. In what will be relevant later in this review, the LA2003 innovated by designating the police as one of the key ‘responsible authorities’ in the licensing process, with the power to make ‘representations’ to the licensing committee during application procedures and hearings (Licensing Act 2003 s.13, Hadfield et al., 2009).

The LA2003 was not without its controversies, however. Notwithstanding the moral panic around the prospect of ‘24 hour drinking’ (Crawford & Flint, 2009; Roberts, 2006), musicians and licensees voiced concerns over the ‘potentially regressive impacts’ of the act which, at the time, required an additional license to play live music (Roberts et al., 2020), increasing costs procured by small venues. An amendment to the act via the Live Music Act 2012 relaxed these restrictions, authorising venues with a capacity of up to 200 to host entertainment without the need of the relevant license (Live Music Act 2012 s.1(2) (1)(b)(ii); Robers et al., 2020). Despite the amendments, late night entertainment (post-eleven o’clock) continues to be under the remit of licensing law. This can be highlighted within these revisions to the act, in which exemptions to entertainment licensing are applied to venues operating between the hours of 08.00 and 23.00 (Live Music Act 2012 s.1(2)(1)(c)).

# Policing and Governing the Night

Recent criminological discourse on the policing and governing of late night spaces is hotly debated and contested, with conflicting accounts on the side of the police and local authority producing differing conclusions. Despite this, literature exists detailing the narrative on both sides. This chapter will draw heavily upon the works of Talbot and Hadfield, who have written detailed analysis on the regulatory practises of the night.

Prior to the passing of the Licensing Act 2003, ‘governmental structures’ including the police, licensing magistrates and local authorities largely played fractured and ‘non-integrated roles’ in which the administrative duties of licensing were governed by licensing magistrates and local authorities (Hadfield et al., 2009). In the same paper, Hadfield et al. (2009) noted that the licensing magistrates in particular were ‘reluctant’ to revoke a license, with one interviewee expressing frustration at the ‘lack of flexibility’ and enforcement. Conversely, the Licensing Act 2003, along with similar legislative powers, ‘swung [the] balance’ (Talbot, 2011) to the police. This argument is backed up by Hadfield (2009), who notes that the police ‘gained greater leverage over the governance of the night’. Both claims are acknowledged in the Act itself, in which police are designated as one of the key ‘responsible authorities’ with powers to instigate reviews; make ‘representations’ in licensing hearings; propose ‘mandatory conditions’; or make recommendations to reject applications altogether (Licensing Act 2003 s.19, s.23, s.31; Hadfield et al., 2009).

This research wants to draw on Talbot’s (2006) theory of ‘third party’ influence on the distribution of space in the night time economy to demonstrate the arguments made above. Talbot argues that ‘third party’ influence in policing occurs on two levels: formally, as part of the licensing process; and informally as activities outside the licensing process. As for the former, while multiple governmental entities can make representations and present evidence at licensing hearings, it is often the police who have a substantial effect on the outcome. Talbot (2006) highlights this in numerous interviews with key figures in the process. For one, while it was common to supply proof when it came to objections, police were notably resentful in ‘providing evidence’ of problems relating to ‘crime and disorder’ — yet, the council were forced to take concerns into ‘consideration’ regardless, as the police had powers to stop an event if desired. Furthermore, in Talbot’s case study on Southview (Talbot, 2006; 2007), one particular licensing department being studied was dominated by an officer who was seen as having ‘superior knowledge’ and ‘experience’, thus being ‘delegated 100%’ of licensing matters.

As for the latter, participants in Herring’s (2008) study noted the role police had in ‘diluting’ the council’s power within the licensing process. Specifically, some police tactics involved bypassing licensing deliberations altogether, leaving councils ‘out of the loop’ while agreements were made before, or in the midst of, a hearing (Herring, 2008). The intentions of this tactic is unclear, but it is evident in both examples that the police are exerting a form of new control over the licensing process — or, as one interviewee said, ‘it can make the police the licensing authority’ (Herring, 2008). 

Subsequently, both of these arguments intend to briefly demonstrate Talbot’s ‘third party influence’ theory in order to illustrate an escalation of police power’s as a result of the LA2003. It goes without saying, however, that these practises aren’t universal, and relationships differ between entities and localities. In one recent example, the owner of a live music venue praises their ‘relationship with the police’; the pragmatic approach of the council; and the level of ‘understanding’ of the NTE and the ‘challenges they face’ (Roberts et al., 2020). In a separate case, a licensing officer admits their reluctance to go to a formal review, save for the most ‘serious incidents’, and touts the review process as ‘measured’ (Hadfield et al., 2009). While a limited example, it is clear that there is a conflicted and understandably confusing approach to how licensing is policed.

Another important stakeholder in the licensing process is the local authority who gain equitable controls on the NTE. While local authorities play an administrative and ‘neutral’ (Talbot, 2006) role, various factors such as ‘funding’, ‘training’ and ‘political motivations’ (Herring, 2008) each have a differing impact on the decision making process. In one instance, Hadfield (2009) notes that authorities hold 'jurisdiction over land use planning’ and are able to ‘control the NTE in both form and content’ including ‘trading hours’ and ‘licensable activities’ (Hadfield et al., 2009). Funding, on the other hand, has knock-on consequences with respect to staffing and the level of training. In one example, respondents in Herring’s (2008) study admitted to having learnt ‘on the job’.

Despite this, there is enthusiasm amongst the local authority to promote the night as a ‘cultural hub’ (Hadfield, 2015) and a driver of the local economy. As Talbot (2006) notes, local councils encouraged the flexible attitudes towards opening hours and premises. Additionally, as findings have suggested in Hadfield’s (2009) study, regulators were ‘more inclined to gently steer businesses towards compliance’ rather than ‘proceed with coercive action’. This ‘schizophrenic’ (Bianchini, 1995) attitude to nightlife could perhaps be neatly summed up by Kolioulis (2018) who remarks: “Clubbing is at the same time celebrated and condemned, redeemed and threatened, controlled and exploited”.

To conclude, the three chapters set out to extensively cover three main themes that provide an important context to the upcoming discussion. Unsurprisingly, there is a vast amount of discussion surrounding the various impacts the LA2003 had on drinking cultures and anti social behaviour in Britain. Yet what is lacking from this discourse is the knock-on effect the LA2003 has on nightclubs. Moreover, new research is beginning to take a holistic approach to licensing (Roberts et al., 2020) which Chapter Two illustrated. Finally, while each theme was discussed independently, it is important to note the intertwining powers at play which dictate nightlife culture as a whole. In the following chapters, this research will begin to explore the specific impacts licensing has on nightclubs with a case study on Fabric which, appropriately for this analysis, has felt the brunt of licensing law in the last five years.

# Methodology 

In order to investigate the question proposed by the research, a mixed methodology approach was utilised. Since this research covers themes of licensing law, regulation, cultures and a case study analysis on one nightclub, it is crucial to employ a number of qualitative methods that satisfies the aims of the study. Three means of data collection were required: an analysis of archival documents; historical reviews; and semi-structured interviews.

During this research, two areas were identified that were key to informing the structure of the interview and subsequently required additional investigation. The first explored the impacts of current and relevant forms of legislation in use, in both a cultural-led and business-led perspective. The second area approached the topic of policing and governance to highlight regulatory differences against the backdrop of current literature.

In order to understand the perspective of the LA2003 amongst night club owners or managers, interview requests were sent out to numerous venues in London via email. Unfortunately, given the difficulties of the pandemic (at the time of writing) and the delicacy of the topic, only one venue responded to the request. As a result, while the study will lack the perspective of different venues in other regions of the UK, a case study will detail the effects the LA2003 has on Fabric — which, coincidentally, inspired this research.

Inspired by Talbot’s extensive work on the Southview case study, the methodological approach this research will undertake includes the use of semi-structured interviews to ‘facilitate access’ and understand the perspective of those behind-the-scenes. This approach will be backed up by historical and archival analysis of council and government documents. This is keenly highlighted by Talbot, who expressed that in order to validate different forms of data a ‘triangulation’ approach was needed — in other words, ‘by looking at an object from more than one standpoint, the researcher gains a more comprehensive knowledge’ about said object (Talbot, 2007). Additionally, the London Borough of Islington keep records of hearings and supplementary documents on their democracy web page; as such, witness statements and council documents were particularly useful in getting an ‘insider’ perspective that otherwise may not have been possible.

Surveys were considered in order to understand, from a holistic point of view, the cultural and behavioural implications of the LA2003 on consumers of nightclubs. However, it was determined that the survey would not give any meaningful results unless the responses covered a wide scope of people and localities. Unfortunately, the researcher lacks the resources needed to achieve a substantial in depth analysis. Therefore, the research will critique impacts of the law from the perspective of the regulator and the regulated using literature and archival documents which are readily accessible. No serious ethical issues were identified when researching this particular topic. However, due to legal issues, questions regarding the process of Fabric’s 2016 licensing hearing could not be asked.

# Critical Discussion 

## A Brief History of Fabric In The NTE 

Fabric opened in 1999 in the post-industrial district of Farringdon (Considine, 2019), signalling the start of economic regeneration and night time growth for the area. Inspired by the rave culture’s transition to licensed events, the club opened in a disused storage facility with the intention of being a ‘legitimised warehouse party’ (Burns, 2009) and an ‘underground haven’ (Considine, 2019), playing host to nights consisting of House, Techno, Drum & Bass, Grime, and other sub-genres of dance music (Hutchinson, 2019). The club was bought out by a consortium named Fabric Life Limited following financial difficulties in 2010 but retained its original vision and founders (Resident Advisor, 2010). The club boasts a capacity of 1500 and during its years of operation has been subject to critical acclaim, praise from the dance music community and, as will be discussed, scrutiny from the local council and police.

The club is governed by Islington Council who administer their alcohol and entertainment license. The council is required to publish a licensing policy document detailing locale-specific policy with the aim of promoting the licensing objectives. There are 29 policies in effect governing a range of issues to prevent nuisance, noise, harm, amongst others and, while some powers could be considered as strict, Islington Council are keen to highlight the benefits of the night time economy and cultural events in the area. Enforcement of the licensing objectives is shared between the Police and the Licensing Authority — both of which employ dedicated Licensing Officers. As set out in the policy document, the Police ‘lead on crime and disorder issues associated with licensed premises’ while the local authority Licensing Officers are designated to deal with ‘general non-compliance’ issues and ‘residents’ complaints’, to name but a few (Islington, 2020). Naturally, Fabric is legally required to hold a premises license and are governed by these policies.

In measuring the impact of the LA2003 on Fabric, this research is particularly concerned with the 2016 License Review which resulted in the closure, and eventual reopening, of the club. After all, the LA2003 facilitated the procedures that led to the venue’s license being revoked. As a result, this chapter aims to answer the following questions: how did formal procedures set out by the LA2003 influence the closure of the club? Which entities were the driving force behind the review and closure? What precedent does this set for other nightclubs? These are important questions to ask as the LA2003 has consequences for every nightclub that operates in the NTE. While the study is only looking at Fabric, this chapter aims to demonstrate the potential implications for other night clubs which are under the remit of licensing law and governance. Informed by the results and analysis, this researcher will propose new areas of research in order to fully understand the impacts of the LA2003.

## The Implications of the Act 

The first area of analysis concerns the implications of the LA2003 on Fabric. In order to understand this perspective, an interview was conducted with Luke Laws who acts as Head of Operations at the club. To validate the results, governmental documents from the Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003 will be used to provide a broader perspective.

Interestingly, despite the challenges presented to the club, Laws expressed positive attitudes towards the LA2003 — a point of discussion that was notably absent from current literature. He notes:

> I do think generally the Licensing Act is a good thing. It opened up certainly [the] late night economy to much more things.
<cite>(Luke Laws, Head of Operations at Fabric, Appendix A)</cite>

While it is easy to gloss over the potential benefits a piece of legislation can bring, the LA2003 was renowned for removing ‘permitted opening hours’ (Light, 2005), in essence facilitating the opportunity for a twenty-four hour license. As Laws mentions, ‘you wouldn’t get parties opening at four in the morning without this licensing act’. Moreover, while some academics are keen to highlight the social implications of surveilling and regulating the night — and the discourse surrounding this does have some merit — research is distinctly lacking the benefits of bringing parties into a licensed area, particularly on matters of health and safety. As Laws describes:

> Even looking at the different objectives they are completely reasonable. (...) I mean you’ve only got to look at (...) what happened recently (...) [the] illegal raves that certainly hit the news. Look at went wrong there. I think there was a drug overdose, a rape and three stabbings at one event. (...) That’s gonna be because it’s unlicensed, therefore things aren’t in place there. The Licensing Act does allow for events to be held safely.
<cite>(Luke Laws, Head of Operations at Fabric, Appendix A)</cite>

Laws admits, however, a ‘stifling of certain behaviour’, but suggests the impact has been ‘positive’ for most club-goers particularly in regard to safety. While more ethnographic research is needed to investigate the potential impacts licensing law has on night club attendees, in demonstrating the existing discourse on the regulatory nature of licensing legislation, Griffin (2018) draws on the differing critiques of freedom held by festival goers. In this study, some interviewees viewed the temporary freedom on offer at commercial festivals as ‘licensed transgression’ as opposed to the real freedom offered at ‘free parties’ — yet whether this impacts or stifles certain groups and cultures is unclear. For what it is worth, a license objective promoting ‘cultural activity and inclusion’ was considered in subsequent amendments, but the proposal was rejected (Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017).

While set at a local level, the LA2003 enabled the provision of a Late Night Levy (LNL) on particular ‘tracts of urban space’ through the ‘imposition of a fee’ to cover the cost of additional policing in the NTE (Hadfield & Measham, 2015). The levy continues to be controversial amongst the hospitality industry and its suitability brought into question (Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017). In querying the impact the levy had on Fabric, Laws was notably jubilant:

> (...) Of course it’s going to impact a business because of the financial cost (...) but what I actually think gets provided for that, or with the money is generated, is quite a lot. (...) I do actually think it’s a good thing. (...) The initiatives which Islington brought out of that levy — it’s won me round.
<cite>(Luke Laws, Head of Operations at Fabric, Appendix A)</cite>

In particular, Laws highlights a welfare initiative named Operation Nightsafe funded by the levy. The initiative, as described by Laws, is supportive of license holders and works ‘very closely with the police’. While discourse has been sceptical of the levy, it is clear, at least with Fabric, that the levy is of benefit.

## Enforcing the Licensing Act 

On the 12th August 2016, Fabric officially had its license suspended by the Licensing Sub-Committee, followed by a decision to permanently revoke the license on the 6th September 2016. The hearing was embroiled in dispute between the police, the local authority, media and the dance music community, and the quarrel sparked a social media led campaign and fundraiser, named #savefabric, and a legal battle (Garcia, 2018). A review was instigated by the Metropolitan Police following two drug-related deaths inside the club. As per licensing legislation and council policy, the club was forced to close while the review took place. This brings the second area of analysis into play: how do the formal procedures utilised by the police affect license holders and nightclubs?

This research has discovered that inconsistencies in policing and the lack of a coherent policy continue to be an issue in the governance of licensing law. Moreover, there is a concern that diminished police funds are having a knock-on effect on the way night-clubs are policed. In a Select Committee review, representatives of Fabric noted:

> (...) There is an increasing perception in the night time industry that Police are seeking a diminution in the number of venues, and particularly nightclubs, not because closure of the venues is genuinely necessary but as an answer to their diminishing resources.
<cite>(Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017)</cite>

While this research is not necessarily concerned with the effects of police funding, it is important to highlight this particular point as it demonstrates the police’s extent of power — in line with the hypothesis made by Talbot (2007) — which was enabled as a result of the LA2003. This presents a new, detailed take on the research: does the policing of the Act have an impact, rather than the Act as whole? In line with Talbot’s (2004) analysis, and the results gathered in the study, it was discovered that police were given a disproportionate representation in court. As Laws describes:

> It’s quite an interesting one in terms of the way those court proceedings work. Hearsay is admissible in the licensing court proceeding. If the police officer says X and an operator or someone else says Y, the police officer will just be believed. That was the weighting.
<cite>(Luke Laws, Head of Operations at Fabric, 2020, Appendix A)</cite>

The issue is exacerbated by the quality of evidence the police provide in hearings and the level of training given to police on licensing matters — again, reaffirming Talbot’s (2004) study. In particular, witnesses expressed concern at ‘the way that police representatives sometimes presented their evidence’ and the ‘quality and consistency of this evidence’ (Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017). It is evident from various witness statements and testimonials uncovered by archival analysis that there are contradictory accounts as to the adherence of licensing objectives. Given the emphasis of police representation in hearings, it presents a risk to venues who may be given additional conditions to a license as a result of the evidence provided to local authorities. As Andrew Grimsey, of solicitors Poppleston Allen, notes:

> There may be a review based on crime and disorder incidents at a premises and there is a summary of those incidents. (...) The problem with the summary approach is that you cannot trust the data (...) if we are served with all the first-capture material, it costs thousands of pounds for a lawyer to go through it, so it is a difficult situation for a typical licensee to deal with.
<cite>(Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017)</cite>

The point of contention here is the implication of summary incident reviews based on first-capture material. To put this into context, a witness statement submitted by an officer during an official license inspection at Fabric noted the lack of thorough searches by door supervisors (Islington, 2016). Yet in a separate visit, an independent licensing consultant was keen to highlight the removal of shoes and socks during searches of some of the customers, a practise he had not observed at other nightclubs at the time (Islington, 2016). It is unclear if both of these statements had any meaningful impact on the process, and it is possible these statements are based on first capture material, but it is important to highlight that particular wording in the Guidance formerly prescribed the licensing authority to ‘accept all reasonable and proportionate representations made by the police’ (Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017). This reaffirms concerns of the quality and depth of evidence presented and the level of scrutiny it receives. Evidently, it shows there has been no change in practises since research was last conducted by Talbot.
While it is easy to critique gaps in the licensing procedure, it is worth considering the impact on police resources brought on by the LA2003. In a Police and Crime Committee Report it was noted that the 24 hour license ‘created a pushback of demand’ on the force which was already under financial burden. Moreover, it found that policing the NTE was ‘demanding’ for the Met which had to adapt with no additional resource (Police and Crime Committee, 2016). Thus, there is evidence to believe that the shortfalls in funding are potentially having a consequence on the Met’s ability to provide a considered and effective response. Regardless, it is categorically the actions of the police, who are given powers by the LA2003 and other forms of legislation, to regulate nightclubs, recommend conditions or sanctions, or, in worst-case scenarios, issue closure orders — regardless of the quality of decision making. Each of these variables most prominently take a toll on the finances of a business, followed by secondary implications for the cultural output of the club.

Notwithstanding the usual costs involved when adhering to standard licensing objectives, additional measures were imposed on Fabric following the suspension of their license. This involved the installation of ID scanners and additional CCTV networks, both of which totalled £23,000 (Islington, 2016). It is unclear what the loss of revenue was for the duration of Fabric’s closure, yet by highlighting this particular cost burden, it is evident — particularly by the club’s use of the #savefabric fundraiser — that a financial stress was placed as a result of the measures put in place by the LA2003. Lastly, it is worth briefly outlining the indirect forces that shape the content of the night as a consequence of the legal procedures. In mediating a solution prior to the final hearing, Fabric put forward a recommendation that, effectively, terminated prolonged high-BPM events from the venue’s music policy; in essence, restricting ‘all night’ genre-specific events like Drum and Bass from the schedule (Islington, 2016). This is not to suggest a blanket ban on certain genres at the club — rather, a consequence of the deliberation process and the considerations of safety for club-goers.
25

Finally, this analysis does not intend to paint the licensees as ‘punchbag’ for unfair practises, nor does the analysis intend to generalise the regulators and authorities as draconian dictators — after all, there is credence to the fact that the local authority and police categorically help in keeping the NTE safe for citizens. Yet, as current literature illustrates, there is consistent evidence to believe that most licensees do go at ‘great lengths to achieve trust’ and ‘maintain good relations’ (Talbot, 2004; Roberts et al., 2020; Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017). Moreover, due to the financial burden of non-compliance, it is not in a businesses’ best interests to risk fines or closure by violating license objectives (Hadfield et al., 2009).

Nonetheless, the ethical ramifications of licensing involve complex, extensive, and conflicting discourse insofar that it is difficult to find a ‘one size fits all’ policy. Perhaps, in the words of Paul Latham, of the UK Live Music Group: “you have to legislate for the worst, as well as the best” (Select Committee on the Licensing Act 2003, 2017).

# Conclusion 

To conclude — the night has had a clear history of contested discourse, regulatory scrutiny and moral panic, dating back to the eighteenth century, and mutating into a new, quasi-celebrated part of contemporary culture. Despite the economical and societal benefits of the NTE, encouraged by local authorities as a form of urban growth, it is the authorities themselves who continue to be in a paradoxical state of affairs when governing the night.

This study set out to provide an answer to the lack of discourse surrounding the LA2003 and its impacts on nightclubs in the UK and, in doing so, has discovered that, while there is no clear distinction between the LA2003 itself and the negative implications on nightclubs, it is the way the LA2003 is used by the authorities — more specifically the police — that is a cause of concern for the viability of nightclubs which operate within the NTE. It was identified that some procedures — as governed by the LA2003, relevant legislation, and locally-set policies — are inherently flawed, conflicted and contested; exacerbated by the lack of funding for the Met. The research illustrated through interviews and archival analysis that there are consistent concerns surrounding the police’s use of evidence and the representations they attain in licensing matters. This research confirmed numerous academics’ concerns that the LA2003 swung the balance in favour of the police who were, ultimately, the antagonisers behind Fabric’s review, closure, and reopening.
Using the themes in the literature review and the proposed methodology, this study set out to apply a framework of analysis on the London-based nightclub Fabric which, in 2016, was involved in a licensing dispute with the local authorities. This landmark case helped to demonstrate the impacts the LA2003 had on the night club which, as a result of the review, was forced to impose tighter controls and increased surveillance at a great expense on cultural output and expenditure. On the other hand, the research discovered some positive aspects of bringing parties into a licensed arena through business-funded levies to support additional policing and strict laws to safeguard the public from harm. However, the results lacked a holistic approach to the question which would have provided a glimpse into consumers’ perspective on licensed pleasure, freedom, or entertainment. In other words, the conclusions drawn from the study provide an answer to only one of the two regulated entities in the NTE — the latter half being the consumers of nightlife.

Moreover, as Fabric represents just one part of the urban night space, the same thinking demonstrated in this study should be applied to other operators in the NTE. After all, the nightclubs that play a part in the NTE differ insofar that they cover a wide spectrum of genres, cultures and localities. In doing so, future researchers should aim to provide insights into how policing differs between different types of nightclubs and the ways the LA2003 has impacted business capital or shaped cultural output. Lastly, future researchers could begin to add another level to this study by investigating the attitudes to the NTE by the UK government in response to the COVID-19 pandemic which, at the time of writing, have been particularly harsh on night time hospitality, through the implementation of 10PM curfews and absence of significant financial grants. These notions seemingly contradict the establishment’s prior support and enthusiasm of the NTE as an economic and cultural benefit to the country.
Overall, however, despite the increasing grip the authorities have on the night, it is no doubt that nightclubs remain to be valuable spaces which unify communities through music and dance; likewise, it is clear that the authorities are going great lengths to ensure the activities partaken by night denizens are safe and beneficial to all. The night remains to be a space of shifting power dynamics and cultural movements, yet one thing is for sure: the nightclub will always be the *Promised Land*.
